Updates to the Java and VS Code docs (#14207)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-language-guides/extensible-predicates.rst

.. _extensible-predicates:

> :orphan:
> :nosearch:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. I'm not entirely sure how @jf205 wanted to make this information at this stage, and his comment below suggests that we may move it. I'll wait and see how we decide to proceed before making any changes.

Reviewer 2: Felicity and I have had a quick discussion about what to do with this article and concluded to leave the content where it is for now but keep it invisible to the ToC and search. In a later docs update we'll split the general info about extensible predicates into the QL language reference and put the static-language-specific info about the models-as-data spec into a suitable place in the language guides.

> Extensible predicates and their interaction with data extensions

Reviewer 2: I need to spend more time looking at this article, but one thing that I'm wondering is whether the general information about extensible predicates should live in the in the language reference. Reasoning: extensible predicates are now a general, language-agnostic thing in CodeQL which in theory could be created by any author to allow structured data to be added to an analysis. For CodeQL model packs, we just happen to have created three 'well-known' ones for sources, sinks, and summaries that are used for modeling dataflow through frameworks in Java. Creating a new reference article might be beyond the scope of this release though.

Author: That makes sense. As I was looking at this I thought that whatever we could make generic would be helpful when we add the next language.

Author: Comment added to follow up issue.

About extensible predicates
---------------------------

At a high level, there are two main components to using data extensions. The query writer defines one or more extensible predicates in their query libraries. CLI and code scanning users who want to augment these predicates supply one or more extension files whose data gets injected into the extensible predicate during evaluation. The extension files are either stored directly in the repository where the codebase to be analyzed is hosted, or downloaded as CodeQL model packs.

This example of an extensible predicate for a source is taken from the core Java libraries https://github.com/github/codeql/blob/main/java/ql/lib/semmle/code/java/dataflow/ExternalFlowExtensions.qll#L8-L11

.. code-block:: ql

    extensible predicate sourceModel(
      string package, string type, boolean subtypes, string name, 
      string signature, string ext, string output, string kind, 
      string provenance
    );

An extensible predicate is a CodeQL predicate with the following restrictions:

- It uses the ``extensible`` keyword.
- It has no body.
- All predicate parameters have primitive types.
- It is not in a module.

> Columns shared by all extensible predicates

Reviewer: This is specific to the extensible predicates for Models as Data ("all" in this context means the extensible predicates describes in `data-extensions-to-model-java-dependencies` and should not included in the general description of extensible predicates.

Reviewer: The same goes for the remaining content in this file.

Author: Comment added to internal issue for follow up.

.. _extensible-predicates:

:orphan:
:nosearch:

Extensible predicates and their interaction with data extensions
================================================================

> You can use data extensions to model the methods and callables that control data flow in any framework or library. This is especially useful for custom frameworks or niche libraries, that are not supported by the standard CodeQL libraries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use data extensions to model the methods and callables that control dataflow in any framework or library. This is especially useful for custom frameworks or niche libraries, that are not supported by the standard CodeQL libraries.
```

?

.. include:: ../reusables/beta-note-model-packs-java.rst

About this article
------------------

This reference article describes the available inputs for the extensible predicates, including access paths, kinds, and provenance.

Sources, sinks, summaries, and neutrals are commonly known as models. These models support several shared arguments and a few model-specific arguments. The arguments populate a series of columns for each extensible predicate.

About extensible predicates
---------------------------

> At a high level, there are two main components to using data extensions. The query writer defines one or more extensible predicates in their query libraries. CLI and code scanning users who want to augment these predicates supply one or more extension files whose data gets injected into the extensible predicate during evaluation. The extension files are either stored directly in the repository where the code base to be analyzed is hosted, or downloaded as CodeQL model packs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At a high level, there are two main components to using data extensions. The query writer defines one or more extensible predicates in their query libraries. CLI and code scanning users who want to augment these predicates supply one or more extension files whose data gets injected into the extensible predicate during evaluation. The extension files are either stored directly in the repository where the codebase to be analyzed is hosted, or downloaded as CodeQL model packs.
```

This example of an extensible predicate for a source is taken from the core Java libraries https://github.com/github/codeql/blob/main/java/ql/lib/semmle/code/java/dataflow/ExternalFlowExtensions.qll#L8-L11

.. code-block:: ql

    extensible predicate sourceModel(
      string package, string type, boolean subtypes, string name, 
      string signature, string ext, string output, string kind, 
      string provenance
    );

An extensible predicate is a CodeQL predicate with the following restrictions:

- It uses the ``extensible`` keyword.
- It has no body.
- All predicate parameters have primitive types.
- It is not in a module.

Columns shared by all extensible predicates
-------------------------------------------

The semantics of many of the columns of the extensible predicates are shared. The columns ``package``, ``type``, ``subtypes``, ``name``, and ``signature`` define which element(s) the model applies to.

- ``package``: Name of the package containing the element(s) to be modeled.
- ``type``: Name of the type containing the element(s) to be modeled.

> - ``subtypes``: A boolean flag indicating whether the model should also apply to all overrides of the selected element(s).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ``subtypes``: A Boolean flag indicating whether the model should also apply to all overrides of the selected element(s).
```

Author: This is something that I always find difficult, but I think here the lower case might be correct: https://programming.guide/java/boolean-vs-boolean.html.

- ``js-injection``: A sink that can be used for XSS via JavaScript injection, such as in a ``Webview.evaluateJavaScript`` call.
- ``ldap-injection``: A sink that can be used for LDAP injection, such as in a ``DirContext.search`` call.
- ``log-injection``: A sink that can be used for log injection, such as in a ``Logger.warn`` call.
- ``mvel-injection``: A sink that can be used for MVEL expression injection, such as in a ``MVEL.eval`` call.
- ``ognl-injection``: A sink that can be used for OGNL injection, such as in an ``Ognl.getValue`` call.
- ``path-injection``: A sink that can be used for path injection in a file system access, such as in calls to ``new FileReader``.
- ``pending-intents``: A sink that can be used to send an implicit and mutable `PendingIntent` to a third party, such as in an ``Activity.setResult`` call.
- ``request-forgery``: A sink that controls the URL of a request, such as in an ``HttpRequest.newBuilder`` call.
- ``response-splitting``: A sink that can be used for HTTP response splitting, such as in calls to ``HttpServletResponse.setHeader``.
- ``sql-injection``: A sink that can be used for SQL injection, such as in a ``Statement.executeQuery`` call.

> - ``template-injection``: A sink that can be used for server side template injection, such as in a ``Velocity.evaluate`` call.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ``template-injection``: A sink that can be used for server-side template injection, such as in a ``Velocity.evaluate`` call.
```

summaryModel(package, type, subtypes, name, signature, ext, input, output, kind, provenance)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Flow through (summary). This extensible predicate is used to model flow through elements.

- ``input``: Access path to the input of the element (where data will flow from to the output).
- ``output``: Access path to the output of the element (where data will flow to from the input).
- ``kind``: Kind of the flow through.

The following kinds are supported:

- ``taint``: This means the output is not necessarily equal to the input, but it was derived from the input in an unrestrictive way. An attacker who controls the input will have significant control over the output as well.
- ``value``: This means that the output equals the input or a copy of the input such that all of its properties are preserved.

neutralModel(package, type, name, signature, kind, provenance)
--------------------------------------------------------------

This extensible predicate is not typically needed externally, but is included here for completeness.

> It has limited impact on data flow analysis.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It has limited impact on dataflow analysis.
```

?

> Manual neutrals are considered high-confidence dispatch call targets and can reduce the number of dispatch call targets during data flow analysis (a performance optimization).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Manual neutrals are considered high-confidence dispatch call targets and can reduce the number of dispatch call targets during dataflow analysis (a performance optimization).
```

> Manual neutrals are considered high confidence dispatch call targets and can reduce the number of dispatch call targets during data flow analysis (a performance optimization).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Manual neutrals are considered high-confidence dispatch call targets and can reduce the number of dispatch call targets during data flow analysis (a performance optimization).
```

- ``Parameter[``\ `n1..n2`\ ``]`` selects the parameters in the given range (both ends included).
- ``ReturnValue`` selects the return value.
- ``Field[``\ `name`\ ``]`` selects the field with the fully qualified name `name`.
- ``SyntheticField[``\ `name`\ ``]`` selects the synthetic field with name `name`.
- ``SyntheticGlobal[``\ `name`\ ``]`` selects the synthetic global with name `name`.
- ``ArrayElement`` selects the elements of an array.
- ``Element`` selects the elements of a collection-like container.
- ``WithoutElement`` selects a collection-like container without its elements. This is for input only.
- ``WithElement`` selects the elements of a collection-like container, but points to the container itself. This is for input only.
- ``MapKey`` selects the element keys of a map.
- ``MapValue`` selects the element values of a map.

.. _provenance:

Provenance
----------

The ``provenance`` column is used to specify the provenance (origin) of the model definition and how the model was verified.
The following values are supported.

- ``manual``: The model was manually created and added to the extensible predicate.

> Values can also take the form`ORIGIN-VERIFICATION`, where `ORIGIN` is one of:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Values can also take the form ``ORIGIN-VERIFICATION``, where ``ORIGIN`` is one of:
```

Sorry, this was my fault

- ``ai``: The model was generated by artificial intelligence (AI).
- ``df``: The model was generated by the dataflow model generator.
- ``tb``: The model was generated by the type based model generator.
- ``hq``: The model was generated using a heuristic query.

> And `VERIFICATION` is one of:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And ``VERIFICATION`` is one of:
```

> The following values are supported:
> 
> - ``manual``: The model was manually created and added to the extensible predicate.
> 
> or values in the form ``origin-verification``, where origin is one of:
> 
> - ``ai``: The model was generated by artificial intelligence (AI).
> - ``df``: The model was generated by the dataflow model generator.
> - ``tb``: The model was generated by the type based model generator.
> - ``hq``: The model was generated using a heuristic query.
> 
> and verification is one of:
> 
> - ``manual``: The model was verified by a human.
> - ``generated``: The model was generated, but not verified by a human.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following values are supported.

- ``manual``: The model was manually created and added to the extensible predicate.

Values can also take the form`ORIGIN-VERIFICATION`, where `ORIGIN` is one of:

- ``ai``: The model was generated by artificial intelligence (AI).
- ``df``: The model was generated by the dataflow model generator.
- ``tb``: The model was generated by the type based model generator.
- ``hq``: The model was generated using a heuristic query.

And `VERIFICATION` is one of:

- ``manual``: The model was verified by a human.
- ``generated``: The model was generated, but not verified by a human.
```

I don't know for sure if this suggestion is helpful

The provenance is used to distinguish between models that are manually added (or verified) to the extensible predicate and models that are automatically generated.

> Furthermore, it impacts the data flow analysis in the following way:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Furthermore, it impacts the dataflow analysis in the following way:
```

?
